----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

                                          Assembly Instructions 

                                    TVR1A 

                   1/2” bore, 5/8” stroke, twin cylinder reversing  
                                  steam engine kit 

    Graham Industries 
      PO Box 15230  
Rio Rancho, NM 87174-0230 
   www.grahamind.com 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------


----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

                                                       PARTS LIST 
         Part#  Qty      Description 
          10000  2       Nut, 0-80 
          10208  7       Machine Screw, 0-80 x 1/8” pan head slot 
          10212  5       Machine Screw, 0-80 x 3/16” pan head slot 
	       10408	22	  Machine	Screw,	0-80	x	1/8”	fillister	head	slot 
         12216  22       Machine Screw, 2-56 x 1/4” pan head slot 
          12220  9       Machine Screw, 2-56 x 5/16” pan head slot 
          12228  9       Machine Screw, 2-56 x 7/16” pan head slot 
          12232  2       Machine Screw, 2-56 x 1/2” pan head slot 
	       12412	21	  Machine	Screw,	2-56	x	3/16”	fillister	head	slot 
          12608  5       Setscrew, 2-56 x 1/8” 
          39001  2       Abrasive paper, 400 grit, 2 3/4” x 4 1/2” 
           40003 4       0-ring, 1/1 6” x 3/16”           AS568-003 
          40006  2       0-ring, 1/8” x 1/4”      AS568-006 
          40012  2       0-ring, 3/8” x 1/2”      AS568-012 
          40030  1       Wrench, male, Hex,   .035” AF 
          51004  2       Cylinder cover, Finished, Machined 
          51005  2       Steam Chest Cover 
          51006  2       Washer, 3/16” x 5/16” x .0 1 5” 
           51007 4       Seal Retainer, 1/16” hole 
          51008  2       Seal Retainer, 1/8” hole 
          51009  1       Wrench, 3/16” AF 
          53004  2       Cylinder, Finished, Machined, 1/2” x 5/8” 
          53007  2       Steam Chest, Finished, Machined 
          53008  2       Slide Valve 
          53061  2       Crosshead Guide, Finished, Machined 
          53062  2       Crosshead 
          53064  2       Pin, Crosshead - Connecting Rod 
          53070  1       Base, Machined 
          53071  1       Cylinder Mount 
           53073 4       Column, 2 1/8” long 
          53074  2       Bellcrank 
          53075  2       Eccentric Strap 
          53076  2       Eccentric 
           53083 4       Bearing, 3/16” ID 
          53084  2       Slide, T-Slot, Male 
          53086  1       Bar, Valve Detent 
          53087  2       Link, Offset 
          53088  2       Link, 2 hole 
          53089  2       Fork, Rod End, 0-80 Internal Thread 
          53100  1       Connector, Reverse Linkage 
          53101  2       Bushing, .093” OD, .060” ID, .130” Long 
          54040  6       Bushing, A.125”, B.093”, C.060”, D.065”, E.008” 
          54104  2       Bushing, Bellcrank Mount 
          80005  1       Assembly Manual 
        A1003  1         Manifold, Steam Inlet 
        A1004  1         Manifold, Steam Exhaust 
        A2001 2          Piston Assembly, with Rod 
        A2004 2          Valve Spindle Assembly 
        A2007  1         Crankshaft Assembly 
        A2008  1         Handle Assembly 
        A2009 2          Connecting Rod Assembly 
        A2014 2          Slide Assembly, T-Slot, Female 
  

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------


----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

                                                BEFORE STARTING 

Thank you for purchasing the TVR1A Twin cylinder Vertical Reversing steam engine assembly kit. 

                                                 GENERAL NOTES 

The	first	time	a	part	is	used,	the	part	number	will	follow	the	name.		In	some	cases	the	part	number	will	be	 
repeated	later	if	clarification	is	needed	where	parts	have	similar	names.		Part	numbers	are	5	characters	long.		 
A	part	number	beginning	with	the	letter	“A”	is	an	assembly	of	two	or	more	parts.		The	parts	identification	 
drawing shows the assembly along with the individual parts in the assembly.  The parts list only shows the  
assembly part number. 

For  descriptive  purposes,  the  following  conventions  are  used  to  describe  the  orientation  of  the  engine.   
The side of the engine that has the reversing lever (53047) protruding and the reversing lever detent bar  
(53086) is the right side.  The base is the bottom and the cylinder covers are at the top or up.  When facing  
the right side, the end of the engine to the right is the front, and the end to the left is the rear.  The photo- 
graphs show the steam inlet and the exhaust to the rear of the engine. 

The direction of rotation of the engine is clockwise looking at the engine from the front when the reversing  
lever is towards the bottom of the engine, and counter clockwise when the lever is raised toward the top. 

It is possible to make some changes in the engine steam inlet and exhaust layout without altering the per- 
formance of the engine.  These may be desired to accommodate a particular boilers piping or other similar  
situations.  The cylinders can be positioned so the exhaust is on the left side and the steam inlet on the  
right side.  This needs to be done when the cylinders are mounted to the cylinder mount.  For reference,  
the exhaust manifold mounts directly to the cylinders, and the steam inlet mounts on the steam chests.   
Either or both of the manifolds can be mounted to face the front of the engine.  This can be changed after  
the engine is built. 

Although	all	the	parts	are	machined,	you	may	wish	to	polish	or	refine	the	finish	on	parts	of	the	engine	either	 
before	or	during	assembly.		If	you	do,	be	careful	not	to	distort	the	ports	on	the	cylinder.		The	finishing	of	this	 
face is detailed in the instructions.  Mating surfaces on the steam chests, steam chest covers, cylinder cov- 
ers,	cylinder	ends,	and	manifold	flanges	also	require	care	to	keep	them	steam	tight.		To	remove	machining	 
marks, use waterproof abrasive paper such as is supplied in this kit.  Use a little light oil on the paper and  
if	the	surface	is	flat,	lay	the	paper	on	a	flat	surface	and	rub	the	part	against	the	paper.		Start	with	400	grit	 
and then move on to 600 grit.  Finish with 1 000 grit if desired, although polish works well after 600 grit and  
even after 400 grit. 

Everyone has their own method for polishing metal.  For brass, I use Wright’s brass polish.  It is available in  
many supermarkets and hardware stores for polishing domestic brass items.  For aluminum I use products  
sold for polishing aluminum automobile wheels.  Flat surfaces are best polished on a strip of cloth stretched  
tight	on	a	flat	surface.		For	cylindrical	areas,	cloth	tape,	such	as	twill	tape,	is	available	in	various	widths	from	 
sewing	supply	stores.		Cotton	works	best	if	you	can	find	it,	but	polyester	is	more	common	and	also	works	 
well.  Of course a regular cloth strip will also work, but the tapes don’t fray on the edges as you pull them  
back and forth. 

A	nice	semi-matte	finish	can	be	produced	using	one	of	the	non-woven	abrasive	pads	sold	for	cleaning	pans	 
in the kitchen.  Use it wet or dry.  These are commonly about 1/4 inch thick and about 4 X 6 inches in size. 

I	rarely	use	gaskets	on	model	engines,	relying	instead	on	lapping	the	mating	surfaces	flat.		Some	builders	 
however may desire to use gaskets.  Ordinary paper makes very serviceable gaskets if it is soaked in oil be- 
fore installation.  A sheet printed with several sets of gaskets is included in this book.  If used, cut them out  
with scissors and a sharp modeling knife before oiling them.  Another alternative, which I prefer over gas- 
kets, is to use one of the gasket replacement compounds which are available at automotive supply stores.   
I have used both Loctite 515 and Loctite 518 with excellent results.  Be careful not to use too much.  Only  
a thin layer is necessary and excess can get into the valves or block steam passages. 

The	2-56	set	screws	are	very	small.		Additional	2-56	X	3/16	fillister	screws	are	included	in	the	kit	and	can	 
be	used	to	replace	the	set	screws	if	desired.		The	set	screws	do	make	the	model	look	nicer,	but	the	fillister	 
head screws are easier to make adjustments with. 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

                                                     TOOLS REQUIRED 

Only	a	few	tools	are	required	to	assemble	this	kit. 

Required	are	a	small	flat	blade	screwdriver,	preferably	two.		One	with	a	3/32	blade	width	and	the	other	with	 
1/8 blade width. 

A	sharp	file.		A	6	inch	single	cut	mill	bastard	is	recommended.		For	safety	please	use	a	handle	on	it. 

Small needle nose pliers. 

Tweezers are recommended for handling the small parts and a magnifying glass may be helpful.  A modeling  
knife with #1 blade is useful for removing burrs and cutting gaskets if used. 

                                                 GENERAL PROCEDURES 

Become	familiar	with	the	parts	contained	in	the	kit	by	comparing	the	parts	with	the	identification	drawing	 
and parts list.  In most cases it will not be necessary to remove the parts from the packages.  Look over the  
assembly drawings and photographs to get an overview of where the parts go. 

It is helpful to read over each section and lay out the parts before starting on that section. 

The TVR1A kit contains approximately 175 parts.  As many of the parts are very small, care must be used in  
opening the parts packages to prevent loss of any of these parts.  A compartmented tray is useful for hold- 
ing parts while assembling you engine.  A clean well lighted area is essential.  A large sheet of paper or light  
colored cardboard makes a good work surface. 

“File	the	surface	flat	and	lap”	is	used	in	the	instruction	is	several	places. 

To	file	a	small	part	flat,	place	the	file	on	a	flat	surface	with	the	handle	towards	you.		Let	the	handle	hang	 
over	the	edge	of	the	surface	so	the	file	can	lay	flat.		Files	can	and	do	bend	if	used	unsupported.		This	is	no	 
problem	for	general	filing,	but	will	round	the	edges	on	parts	when	you	are	trying	to	get	them	flat.		Then	hold	 
the	part	on	the	file	and	pull	it	towards	you.		On	tall	parts	be	careful	that	the	part	does	not	tip.		Try	to	keep	a	 
uniform pressure on the part.  As a rule, the edge that is towards you will be cut more than the trailing edge,  
so rotate the part 180 degrees and make a second cut.  Only a few strokes should be necessary to remove  
any	machining	marks	or	burrs.		Keep	the	file	clean.		Brush	out	any	chips	often. 

After	filing	the	surface,	lap	it	using	the	400	grit	abrasive	paper	supplied.		Place	the	paper	on	a	flat	surface	 
with the abrasive up. put several drops of light oil on the paper, and rub the part on the paper using light  
pressure.		A	super	flat	surface	is	not	necessary.		A	table	or	counter	that	has	a	pressure	laminate	surface	will	 
work well.  Other surfaces that work well are a piece of thick plate glass or the table of a table saw.  Use  
a	figure	8	pattern	and	rotate	the	part	every	few	strokes.		This	keeps	the	cut	even	over	the	entire	surface.		 
Clean the part thoroughly after lapping to remove any trace of abrasive.  Hot water and dish washing deter- 
gent work well with a small brush.  Dry the part. 

  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                                                    ASSEMBLY 

Now with all the preliminaries out of the way, lets build an engine. 

Construction	is	broken	into	several	sub-assemblies.		The	first	is	the	base-crankshaft.		Then	the	valve	gear	 
is partially assembled on the columns in two groups, front and rear.  These are then attached to the base- 
crankshaft assembly.  Last the cylinder assembly is built and attached to the other two sections.  At this  
point	the	valve	gear	is	adjusted	and	the	remaining	details	are	finished	up. 

                                        BASE-CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY 

●	Clean	and	remove	and	burrs	on	the	BASE	(53070),	BEARINGS	(53083),	CRANKSHAFT	ASSEMBLY	(A2007),	 
ECCENTRICS (53076), and ECCENTRIC STRAPS (53075).   Polish any parts if desired. 

●	Slide	a	3/16”	x	5/16”	x	0.015”	WASHER	(51006)	on	each	end	of	the	crankshaft	assembly.		Place	a	drop	of	 
oil on each end of the crankshaft and then slide a bearing on each end of the crankshaft.  Slide each bearing  
back and forth to distribute the oil.  Slide the bearings and washers against the crankwebs of the crankshaft  
assembly. 

                                                                               ●	Place	the	base	on	a	flat	surface	 
                                                                               with  the  rounded  edges  of  the  
                                                                               base  up.    Set  the  crankshaft  as- 
                                                                               sembly so the crankwebs set in the  
                                                                               opening in the center of the base.   
                                                                               Secure  the  assembly  to  the  base  
                                                                               using  four  2-56  x  1/4  pan  head  
                                                                               screws  (12216).    Do  not  tighten.   
                                                                               Place the two outer bearings on the  
                                                                               crankshaft  and  secure  with  four  
                                                                               more 2-56 X 1/4 screws.  Tighten  
                                                                               the 8 screws a little at a time while  
                                                                               rotating  the  crankshaft  to  check  
                                                                               for binding.  Adjust the bearings so  
                                                                               the  crankshaft  turns  with  a  mini- 
mum of binding.  Minor binding will not cause any problems, as the bearings will seat in after a short period  
of running. 

●	Mark	the	outer	bearing	as	to	position	and	which	end	they	are	on	and	remove	them. 

●	Insert	a	BUSHING	(54040)	through	the	hole	in	the	flat	portion	of	each	eccentric	strap	from	the	side	op- 
posite	the	flat	side.		Holding	the	bushings	in	place,	file	the	small	ends	flush	with	the	flat	side	of	the	eccentric	 
straps.  As it will be some time before assembly holds these bushings in place, temporarily use a 0-80 x 3/16  
pan head screw (10212) and a 0-80 nut to hold them in place. 

●	Install	a	setscrew	(12608)	in	each	eccentric.		Place	a	drop	of	oil	on	each	eccentric	where	it	will	fit	into	the	 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

eccentric	strap.		Slide	each	eccentric	into	the	flat	side	of	an	eccentric	strap.		Position	the	setscrew	towards	 
the arm of the eccentric strap.  Slide an eccentric assembly on each end of the crankshaft with the hub of the  
eccentric to the outside of the engine.  Do not tighten the eccentric set screws.  Replace the outer bearings in  
the same position that you removed them.  Tighten the bearing screws and check the crankshaft for binding. 

●	Your	base-crankshaft	assembly	should	look	like	the	photo	on	the	previous	page	at	this	point.		Set	this	as- 
sembly aside and start on the next assemblies. 

  
                                                VALVE GEAR ASSEMBLIES 

●	Build	the	two	valve	gear	assemblies	at	the	same	time.		They	are	identical	except	that	they	are	mirror	im- 
ages of each other.  Only the front assembly will be detailed with notes for the rear assembly.  Photo 2 shows  
the two assemblies with the front assembly on the left and the rear assembly on the right. 

●	Clean	and	remove	burrs	on	the	columns	(53073),	bellcranks	(53074),	offset	links	(53087),	2	hole	links	 
(53088), and Bellcrank mount bushings (54104). 

  
●	The	bellcranks	have	the	remains	of	three	small	tabs	used	to	support	the	part	during	machining.		These	 
are on the outside edges of the parts.  File these tabs off and then take a few extra strokes to remove the  
machining cutter marks on these edges.  File lengthwise on these edges.  Although not necessary for opera- 
tion,	the	flat	faces	of	these	parts	can	be	improved	by	filing.		If	you	plan	to	polish	these	parts,	wait	a	little	 
while,	as	two	screws	need	to	be	filed	off	flush	during	assembly.		Then	you	can	disassemble	that	part,	polish	 
the bellcranks, and reassemble. 

●	One	end	of	the	short	links	will	also	have	a	small	tab	that	must	be	filed	off.		If	you	get	a	little	flat	on	this	 
end	when	filing,	you	can	hide	that	end	in	slot	of	the	fork	a	little	later. 

●	Insert	a	bellcrank	mount	bushing	into	the	side	of	a	column.		File	the	small	protruding	end	of	the	bushing	 
flush	by	placing	the	file	on	a	flat	surface	and	slide	the	assembly	over	the	file	while	pressing	on	the	bushing.		 
Repeat for the rear assembly. 

●	The	short	end	of	each	column	goes	toward	the	top	of	the	engine.		Insert	a	2-56	x	½”	pan	head	screw	 
through the bushing from the small diameter end of the bushing.  Thread the screw into a bellcrank.  The  
bellcrank is spaced away from the column by the large end of the bushing.  Repeat for the second column  
but place the bellcrank in a mirror image position.  Rotate the bellcranks so the long arm is perpendicular to  

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

the column and the short end is toward the top of the column.  Facing the bellcrank side of the assemblies,  
the front assembly will have the arms of the bellcrank to the right of the column and the rear assembly will  
have the arms to the left. 

●	Place	the	offset	links	on	a	flat	surface	so	the	long	end	lays	flat	on	the	surface.		The	short	end	will	not	touch	 
the	surface.		Insert	a	BUSHING	(54040)	in	the	hole	in	the	long	end	of	each	link.		File	the	bushings	flush	on	 
the other side.  Insert a 0-80 X 3/16” pan head screw through the small end of each bushing.  Thread the  
screw into the short arm of the bellcrank from the side of the bellcrank nearest the column.  Repeat for the  
other assembly. 

[OPTIONAL]	The	two	screw	ends	that	protrude	from	the	bellcrank	look	much	better	if	they	are	filed	flush	 
with	the	bellcrank.		After	filing	these	screws	flush,	the	screws	may	be	removed	and	the	bellcrank	polished.		 
Then reassemble. 

●	Insert	a	Bushing	(54040)	in	one	end	of	each	of	the	short	2	hole	links.		If	one	end	of	the	link	is	distorted	 
from	filing	the	tab,	insert	the	bushing	in	the	best	looking	end.		The	other	end	will	be	hidden	during	final	 
assembly.		File	the	protruding	small	end	of	the	bushing	flush	with	the	link.		Insert	a	0-80	X	1/8”	pan	head	 
in the small end of the bushing and attach to the long arm of the bellcrank on the side away the column.   
Repeat for the second assembly. 

  

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

                                              BUILDING UPWARD 

●	The	photo	above	shows	how	to	tie	together	everything	we	have	done	so	far	plus	add	a	few	more	pieces. 

●	Attach	the	2	valve	gear	assemblies	just	completed	to	the	right	side	of	the	crankshaft-base	assembly.		The	 
right side is the side that has the extra hole near the center of the crankshaft assembly.  Facing the right  
side, the front valve gear assembly goes to your right.  Attach the columns to the base using 2-56 X 1/4 pan  
head screws.  Make sure the long ends of the columns are next to the base.  The linkage is to the ends of the  
engine, approximately in line with the eccentrics.  As you tighten the screws, lay a straight edge between the  
two	columns	along	the	flat	edges	of	the	columns.		Adjust	the	columns	rotation	so	the	straight	edge	touches	 
all	along	both	the	flats	on	the	columns. 

●	Remove	the	screws	used	to	hold	the	bushings	in	the	eccentric	straps.		Position	the	bellcrank	so	the	long	 
end is horizontal and over the eccentric.  The short end should be towards the top of the engine.  Place a  
0-80	X	1/8	screw	through	the	bushing	in	the	eccentric	strap	from	the	flat	side	of	the	strap	and	thread	it	into	 
the tapped hole on the offset link and tighten.  Slide the eccentric towards the center of the engine.  View  
the assembly from the top of the engine.  The bellcrank should be parallel to the long end of the offset link  
and have a uniform space between them.  If not, slightly adjust the rotation of the column.  Repeat for the  
other end of the engine.  All the linkages should move freely at this point. 

●	Clean,	remove	burrs,	and	polish	the	male	t-slot	slides	(53084),	the	female	t-slot	slide	assemblies	(A2014),	 
and the reverse linkage connector.  Put a drop of oil in each of the female t-slot slides.  Slide a male slide into  
each	female	slide	assembly	to	check	for	fit.		Please	note	that	the	male	slides	are	NOT	square.		The	narrow	 
dimension	only	will	fit	in	the	female	slide	assembly.		These	will	be	a	close	fit.		Do	not	file	the	slides	unless	 
absolutely	necessary	to	fit	them	together.		Remove	the	male	slides.		Insert	the	male	slides	in	the	end	holes	 
of	the	eccentric	straps	with	the	flat	faces	of	the	slides	facing	each	other.		Secure	the	male	slides	to	the	ec- 
centric straps with 0-80 X 1/8 pan head screws. 
Insert 3 setscrews (12608) in the tapped holes on the reverse linkage connector. 
Attach the columns to the left side of the base using 2-56 x 1/4 inch screws aligning them in the same way  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

you	aligned	the	other	columns.		You	should	be	able	to	see	through	both	holes	at	the	same	time. 

●	Rotate	the	eccentric	straps	so	they	are	vertical	with	the	“U”	on	the	bellcranks	facing	upward.		With	the	 
connector between the columns, insert a female slide assembly through each column and into the ends of  
the connector block 

●	Now	comes	the	tricky	part.		I	had	you	insert	the	male	slides	in	the	female	part	earlier	so	you	know	they	 
really	do	fit.		Rotate	a	female	slide	about	30	degrees	so	that	it’s	opening	is	towards	a	point	over	the	crank- 
shaft at the top of the engine.  Move the male slide into position over the end of the female slide by rotating  
the eccentric strap.  Guide the male slide into the female slide and rotate the female slide so the slide part  
is vertical and the male slide is fully engaged.  Repeat for the other set of guides. 

●	Before	setting	this	assembly	aside,	install	the	connecting	rod	assemblies	(A2009)	onto	the	crankshaft	as- 
sembly.  Do this one at a time so the parts of the two connecting rods do not get mixed up. 

●	Before	removing	the	connecting	rod	bearing	cap	from	the	connecting	rod,	mark	one	side	of	the	rod	and	 
bearing cap with a marker or pencil so you know which way to reinstall the cap on the rod.  A small scratch  
will also work and will be permanent for future use if necessary.  The rod and cap have had the bearing sur- 
face machined at the same time so everything will match properly.  If the caps are mixed up on the rods,  
there	is	a	fair	chance	that	one	of	the	rods	will	fit	tight	on	the	crankpin. 

●	Rotate	the	crankshaft	so	one	of	the	crankpins	is	at	the	bottom	of	the	engine. 

●	Remove	the	connecting	rod	cap	from	the	connecting	rod	by	loosening	the	two	screws	holding	the	cap	on.		 
Leave the screws in the cap.  Put a drop of oil on the bearing surface of the connecting rod. 

●	From	the	top	of	the	engine,	slide	the	connecting	rod	between	the	crankwebs	onto	the	crankpin	that	is	at	 
the bottom of the engine. 

●	While	holding	the	connecting	rod	in	place,	turn	the	engine	over	and	place	the	bearing	cap	with	screws	on	 
the connecting rod and tighten the screws.  Pay attention to the alignment marks that you made on the two  
parts.		The	connecting	rod	will	probably	be	slightly	tight	on	the	crankpin,	but	should	move	easily	with	finger	 
pressure. 

●	Repeat	the	procedure	with	the	other	connecting	rod. 

●	Now	set	this	assembly	aside	and	smile.		It’s	starting	to	look	like	an	engine. 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

                                                   THE CYLINDER GROUP 

         

●	In	this	assembly	section	a	number	of	parts	will	require	lapping	as	described	in	the	general	procedures.		I	 
prefer to lap all the parts at the same time and then clean and oil them before beginning assembly. 

●	Check	the	paragraph	on	gaskets	and	gasketing	materials	in	the	general	notes.		For	most	builders,	gaskets	 
or gasketing materials will not be necessary if lapping is done carefully.  However laser cut  gaskets are  
included. 

The	areas	that	require	lapping	are: 

1.       Both ends of each cylinder. 
2.       The cylinder port face on each cylinder. 
3.       The steam chest faces that contact the cylinder and chest cover. 
4.       The side of the steam chests that mount the steam manifold. 
5.       One side of the steam chest covers. 
6.       One side of the cylinder covers. 
7.       The side of the cylinder mount that does not have a seal recess. 
8.	      The	flanges	of	the	manifolds. 
9.       The steam valve face with the rectangular recess. 

●	Using	a	corner	of	the	abrasive	paper,	remove	any	burrs	that	are	around	the	exhaust	holes	on	the	side	of	 
the cylinder. 

●	After	lapping,	clean	everything	to	remove	all	traces	of	abrasive	compound.		This	will	require	more	than	 
wiping with a cloth.  The parts must be cleaned with either solvent or hot water with a detergent added.  Be  
sure	to	flush	out	the	steam	passages	in	the	cylinders. 

●	Remove	any	burrs	from	the	piston-piston	rod	assembly	(A2001).		Put	a	drop	of	oil	in	the	groove	on	each	 
piston.  Slide the 3/8 ID O-Ring (40012) over the piston and into the groove.  Place a drop of oil on each  
O-Ring and rotate the piston to coat the O-Ring with oil. 

●	Hold	the	cylinder	(53004)	with	the	valve	port	face	towards	you	and	the	exhaust	opening	to	your	left.		Slide	 
the piston into the cylinder with the piston rod down.  This is the front cylinder set. 

●	Install	the	piston	in	the	other	cylinder	in	the	same	way	except	the	exhaust	opening	must	be	to	your	right.		 
This is the rear cylinder set. 

  

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

●	Hold	the	cylinder	mount	(53071)	with	side	containing	the	seal	recesses	away	from	you.		Rotate	the	mount	 
so the edge with three holes is down.  Insert the piston rod for the front cylinder in the center hole of the  
right	set	of	holes	and	position	the	cylinder	so	the	flat	port	face	is	to	your	right.		Secure	the	cylinder	to	the	 
cylinder mount with two 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws (12216).  Install these two screws in the holes that are  
rotated 90 degrees from the 0-80 tapped holes in the cylinder mount. 

●	Check	the	assembly.		The	exhaust	outlet	on	the	side	of	the	cylinder	must	be	towards	the	edge	of	the	cyl- 
inder mount that has 3 holes. 

●	Mount	the	second	cylinder	in	the	same	manner.		When	mounted,	both	cylinders	will	have	the	exhaust	 
outlets on the same side. 

●	Slide	a	1/8	ID	O-Ring	(40006)	over	each	piston	rod	and	press	it	into	the	seal	recess	on	the	cylinder	mount.		 
Be careful going over the threads of the piston rod so the threads don’t damage the O-Ring. 

●	Slide	a	1/8	ID	seal	retainer	(51008)	over	each	piston	rod	and	secure	each	to	the	cylinder	mount	with	two	 
0-80	X	1/8	fillister	head	screws	(10408). 

●	Thread	a	5-40	X	0.047	nut	(53023)	on	each	piston	rod.		Position	it	about	the	middle	of	the	threaded	part	 
of each piston rod.  It will be adjusted later. 

●	Inspect	each	crosshead	(53062)	and	crosshead	guide	(53061)	and	remove	any	burrs.		Check	by	test	fitting	 
the crossheads in the guides.  Remove the crossheads from the guides. 

●	Install	a	crosshead	on	each	connecting	rod.		Thread	each	crosshead	on	about	2	to	3	turns	and	adjust	the	 
crossheads so the threaded 2-56 hole in each of them faces the middle of the assembly (the holes will face  
each other). 

●	Slide	a	crosshead	guide	over	each	crosshead	so	the	two	notches	in	the	guide	fit	over	the	two	screws	hold- 
ing the cylinder mount to the cylinder.  Secure each crosshead guide using four 2-56 X 5/16 pan head screws  
                                                      (12220).  Put a drop of oil on each side of the crosshead  
                                                      guide where it touches the crosshead. 

                                                      ●	A	retaining	compound	is	used	to	locate	the	valve	driver	on	 
                                                      the valve spindle on the valve spindle assembly (A2004).   
                                                      There may a small amount of this retaining compound at  
                                                      each end of the valve driver.  If so, scrape it off with a knife  
                                                      or screwdriver blade. 

                                                      ●	Test	fit	the	valve	driver	in	the	valve	(53103)	slot.		It	should	 
                                                      be	a	free	easy	fit,	but	with	very	little	play.		If	it	is	tight,	file	 
                                                      the	inside	of	the	valve	slot	until	it	is	an	easy	fit. 

●	Slide	the	threaded	end	of	the	valve	spindle	assembly	(A2004)	through	one	of	the	end	holes	in	the	steam	 
chest	(53007)	from	the	INSIDE	of	the	steam	chest	until	the	not	threaded	end	of	the	spindle	fits	inside	the	 
steam chest.  Then slide the not threaded end through the end hole in the other end of the steam chest. 

●	Place	a	drop	of	oil	on	each	end	of	the	valve	spindle	rod.		Install	a	1/16	ID	O-Ring	(40003)	on	each	end	of	 
the valve spindle rod using care not to damage the O-Ring when sliding over the threaded portion of the rod. 

●	Secure	each	O-Ring	in	place	with	a	1/16”	hole	seal	retainer	(51007)	and	two	0-80	X	1/8	fillister	head	 
screws (10408). 

●	Repeat	for	the	second	set	of	valve	chest	parts. 

●	Center	the	valve	driver	in	each	of	the	steam	chests.		Set	the	steam	chests	next	to	each	other	with	the	 
threaded end of the valve spindle facing you and the two steam inlets facing each other.  Place a valve on  
each spindle. 

●	Place	a	drop	of	oil	on	the	port	face	of	each	of	the	cylinders	between	the	steam	port	openings. 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

●	Place	the	steam	chest	assembly	on	your	left	on	the	port	face	of	the	front	cylinder	with	the	threaded	end	 
of the valve spindle at the crosshead end of the cylinder.  The rectangular cavity of the valve must touch  
the port face of the cylinder.  The steam inlet on the steam chest must be on the opposite side of the cylin- 
der from the exhaust outlet in the cylinder.  If not, you probably have the steam chest on the rear cylinder.   
Temporarily hold the steam chest to the cylinder using two 2-56 x 7/16 pan head screws (12228).  Gently  
tighten	these	screws.		If	tightened	firmly,	they	will	damage	the	lapped	surface	of	the	steam	chest	and	may	 
                                                                       cause a steam leak later. 

                                                                       ●	Install	the	other	steam	chest	assembly	on	the	 
                                                                       rear cylinder in the same manner. 

                                                                       ●	Thread	a	0-80	nut	(10000)	to	the	middle	of	the	 
                                                                       threaded portion of each valve spindle.  Thread  
                                                                       the tapered end of a fork (53089) on each valve  
                                                                       spindle approximately 6 turns.  Position the fork  
                                                                       so the 0-80 tapped hole in the side of the fork  
                                                                       that faces the crosshead guide. 

                                                                         

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

                                   FINAL ASSEMBLY AND ADJUSTMENT 

Now it will really become an engine.  It is time to tie everything together, make all the adjustments, and  
finish	up	the	engine. 

●	Place	the	base	assembly	with	the	front	to	your	right.		The	coupler	for	the	valve	gear	should	be	away	from	 
you.  Notice the hole in the base on the side nearest you near the center of the crankshaft assembly.  With  
the crosshead guides down, rotate the cylinder assembly so the side with the hole near the middle is near- 
est you. 

●	Place	the	cylinder	assembly	on	the	4	columns	of	the	base	assembly	with	the	connecting	rods	entering	the	 
crosshead guides.  Make sure the side of the cylinder assembly with 3 holes lines up with the side of the  
base with 3 holes. 

●	Secure	the	cylinder	mount	to	the	4	columns	with	four	2-56	x	1/4	pan	head	screws. 

●	Place	the	connecting	rod	end	in	the	crosshead	slot	and	align	holes	between	the	connecting	rod	and	the	 
crosshead.  It may be necessary to rotate the crankshaft and slide the piston up or down to accomplish this. 

●	For	the	following	operation,	it	may	be	necessary	to	rotate	the	eccentric,	the	t-slide,	or	both	to	obtain	clear- 
ance to work in.  Insert the threaded end of the crosshead-connecting rod pin (53064) in the crosshead  
and through the connecting rod.  Screw the pin into the far side of the crosshead.  Tighten the pin securely.   
Repeat for the other cylinder. 

●	Place	the	free	end	of	the	short	2	hole	link	in	the	slot	in	the	fork	on	the	valve	spindle.		Align	the	holes.		 
Insert a bushing (53101) through the hole in the fork and the hole in the link.  The bushing will be almost  
flush	with	the	surface	of	the	fork.		Insert	a	0-80	X	3/16	pan	head	screw	in	the	bushing	and	tighten.		Repeat	 
for the other end of the engine. 

●	Rotate	the	connector	on	the	valve	gear	so	the	setscrews	face	down.		Insert	the	end	of	the	handle	assembly	 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

(A2008)	in	the	hole	of	the	connector	from	the	other	side	of	the	engine	until	the	end	is	flush	on	the	far	side	 
of the connector.  Tighten the center set screw on the connector to hold the handle assembly. 

●	Install	the	valve	detent	bar	(53086)	between	the	cylinder	mount	and	the	base.		The	notches	must	be	 
nearest the cylinder mount, and face the front of the engine.  With the connector slid toward the front of the  
engine, the bar on the handle will lightly engage the notches on the valve detent bar.  Secure using a 2-56  
x	3/16”	fillister	head	screw	(12414)	through	the	base	and	a	2-56	x	¼”	pan	head	screw	through	the	cylinder	 
mount.		You	may	have	to	loosen	the	four	screws	holding	the	cylinder	mount	to	the	columns	to	make	it	easier	 
to get the detent bar in there. 

●	Place	the	handle	bar	in	the	notch	nearest	the	base	of	the	engine.		Rotate	the	two	female	T-slides	so	they	 
are	vertical	and	align	with	the	flat	sides	of	the	columns.		Slide	the	connector	so	it	is	centered	between	the	 
columns.  This will bend the handle bar slightly so it is forced into the notches on the valve detent bar.  Make  
sure the female T-slides are pushed up against each column and tighten the two outer setscrews in the con- 
nector. 

●	Rotate	the	crankshaft	until	one	of	the	pistons	is	at	the	top	of	its	stroke.		Adjust	the	position	of	the	piston	 
by	rotating	it	with	a	screwdriver	in	the	slot	in	the	center	of	the	piston.		Adjust	it	so	it	is	flush	with	the	top	of	 
the cylinder, and then turn it 3/4 of a turn clockwise to lower it into the cylinder.  Tighten the 5-40 lock nut  
using the supplied open-ended wrench (51009).  Repeat for the second cylinder. 

●	Position	the	handle	bar	in	the	center	notch	of	the	valve	detent	bar.		Rotate	the	crankshaft	so	the	FRONT	 
piston is at the BOTTOM of its stroke.  Set the eccentric on the REAR so the setscrew is in line with the arm  
of the eccentric strap and tighten the setscrew.  It may be necessary to rotate the valve spindle in the fork  
to adjust the position of the valve so it does not strike the end of the steam chest. 

●	Rotate	the	crankshaft	so	the	REAR	piston	is	at	the	TOP	of	its	stroke.		Set	the	eccentric	on	the	FRONT	so	 
the setscrew is in line with the arm of the eccentric strap and tighten the setscrew.  Check that the valve has  
clearance in the steam chest. 

●	Check	that	the	handle	is	in	the	center	notch.		With	the	REAR	piston	still	at	the	top	of	its	stroke,	adjust	 
the REAR valve spindle to center the valve so it covers all the ports on the port face.  Place the handle in  
the	first	notch	above	the	middle	notch.		Rotate	the	crankshaft	while	observing	the	valve.		The	edges	of	the	 
valve should just come to the edge of the cylinder ports.  The cylinder ports may or may not be visible at  
any position.  If one port is visible and the other is not visible at any position, adjust the valve spindle to  
center the valve on the ports. 

●	Check	the	adjustment	by	placing	the	handle	in	the	first	notch	below	the	center	notch.		Rotate	the	crank- 
shaft and observe the valve.  The valve should line up on the ports so they are completely covered at all  
times	or	have	equal	clearance	between	the	both	edges	of	the	valve	and	the	cylinder	ports	as	the	crankshaft	 
is rotated. 

●	Lock	the	valve	spindle	by	tightening	the	0-80	nut	on	the	valve	spindle	against	the	fork. 

●	Rotate	the	crankshaft	so	the	FRONT	piston	is	at	the	top	of	its	stroke.		Adjust	the	FRONT	valve	spindle	to	 
center the valve so it covers all the ports on the port face. 

●	Adjust	the	front	valve	in	the	same	way	as	the	rear	was	adjusted.		Lock	the	spindle	with	the	0-80	nut. 

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

Now it’s getting close to test run time.  Before closing up everything, put a drop of oil in each cylinder and  
in each steam chest. 

●	Place	a	cylinder	cover	on	each	cylinder	with	the	lapped	side	of	the	cylinder	cover	against	the	cylinder.		Se- 
cure	each	cover	with	six	2-56	X	3/16	fillister	head	screws. 

●	Remove	the	2	temporary	retaining	screws	holding	the	steam	chest	in	place.		Install	a	steam	chest	cover	 
(51005) on the steam chest with the lapped side next to the steam chest and secure with four 2-56 X 7/16  
pan head screws.  Repeat for the second steam chest. 

●	Install	the	steam	inlet	and	exhaust	manifolds	on	the	steam	chests	and	cylinders	respectively.		Use	four	 
0-80	X	1/8	fillister	head	screws	on	each	manifold. 

  

  

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

                                                      TEST RUNNING 

OIL	EVERYTHING! 

Even if you are planning to run the engine on steam, it is better to test run it on compressed air.  With air,  
the engine will remain cool and be easier to adjust if any adjustments are necessary. 

A pressure regulator or other means must be used to prevent the engine from being over pressured.  The  
engine	is	rated	for	35	PSI	and	this	must	not	be	exceeded.		For	the	first	30	minutes	of	operation	do	not	ex- 
ceed 15 PSI. 

Mount the engine to a heavy base with screws or hold the base in a vice with protective strips so the base  
is not scratched. 

Place the reversing handle in the bottom notch.  With the handle in this position, the engine will run clock- 
wise as viewed from the front of the engine. 

Connect the air supply to the steam inlet manifold.  The inlet manifold has the smaller pipe and hooks to  
the steam chests.  Set the air supply regulator to 15 PSI.  The engine should start running.  If it does not,  
try moving the reversing handle to the top notch, and then back to the bottom notch.  Since the engine has  
not been run, the valves may not be seated on the cylinder face, and this movement will seat them with air  
pressure on the valve. 

After the engine starts, let it run for a few minutes, then move the reversing lever to the top notch.  The  
engine will run in the opposite direction.  Reduce the air pressure to about 10 PSI and let the engine run for  
about 30 minutes.  During this time, reverse the direction of rotation several times with the reversing lever. 

After this run in, the supply pressure can be increased gradually to 30 PSI.  Do not run at this high a pres- 
sure for more that a few minutes at a time if there is no load on the engine. 

Disconnect the air and place several drops of oil in the steam inlet manifold.  Reconnect the air and continue  
to	run.		While	running	on	air,	this	oiling	procedure	should	be	done	every	30	minutes	for	the	first	few	hours	 
of	operation.		After	this	time,	a	few	drops	of	oil	in	the	manifold	every	4	or	5	hours	of	operation	is	sufficient.		 
At the same time, put a little oil on all the bearings, pivot bushings, and sliding surfaces.  A lightweight in- 
strument or sewing machine oil is good for this.  Be careful about using some of the common household oils.   
Many of these contain more solvents than oil. 

As the engine starts to run more easily, the reversing lever can be moved to the next to the end notch.   
This will reduce air consumption.  The reversing lever is not intended as a speed control, but can be used to  
increase	efficiency	when	running	with	a	light	load	by	placing	it	in	the	notches	next	to	the	end.		The	center	 
notch is an off position, and the notches to each side of the center are used only for adjustment.  Some  
engines may run in these notches, but it is not a reliable operating position.  Most engines will not run in  
this position. 

After the engine is run in it will have black oil everywhere.  Clean all the excess oil off the engine.  Hot wa- 
ter and detergent can be used to clean up the engine.  Dry off the engine and oil everything.  Only a small  
amount of oil will be necessary now, as everything will have established running clearances by running. 

  
                                                   STEAM OPERATION 

Do not attempt operation on steam until the engine has run for at least one hour on compressed air. 

When operating on steam, the boiler MUST have a safety pressure release valve set at no higher than 35 PSI  
and 30 PSI is preferred.  Pressure higher than 35 PSI may cause mechanical failure in the engine. 

When	operating	on	steam,	the	engine	will	require	more	lubrication	than	when	operating	on	air.		Steam	is	 
very effective at removing grease and oil and is used for this purpose. 

The most effective way to lubricate the engine is with a lubricator in line with the steam supply.  The most  

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

popular type of lubricator is the displacement lubricator.  If it is used, it should be mounted as close to the  
engine as possible, and after any steam regulating valves or governors.  This type of regulator will not work  
with compressed air.  It works on the principle of a small amount of steam condensing into water, and the  
oil	floating	on	the	condensed	water. 

A special steam cylinder oil is recommended for lubrication.  It is compounded so it does not wash away from  
the surfaces as easily with steam as does more common oils.  If any super-heat is applied to the steam, it  
is essential. 

It is not recommended at super heated steam be used with this engine.  If any is used, it should be only  
moderately super heated.  The use of saturated steam is recommended, as the condensation of the steam  
will provide additional lubrication to the engine. 

                                        RADIO CONTROL OF THE TVR1A 

The TVR1A can be used in radio controlled devices.  The recommended procedure for this is to use two  
servos.  One to control the steam supply by a valve and to act as a throttle.  The second is used to reverse  
the engine. 

To set up the engine for servo reversing, the following is recommended. 

Remove the reversing handle assembly and replace it with a piece of 1/16 inch diameter music wire.  The  
wire should be long enough to engage the notches on the detent bar the same as the regular handle does.   
The other end of the wire can pass through the connector and attach to linkage to your servo. 

Loosen the detent bar and rotate it so the notches face the outside of the engine and the music wire slides  
on the smooth side of the detent bar.  This end of the music wire can now be used as an indicator to set up  
the servo operation.  The servo and linkage is then adjusted so the wire lines up with the top and bottom  
notches at the extremes of the servo travel. 

                                              DISPLAY OPERATION 

When	using	the	VRLA	as	an	operating	display	model,	it	is	an	advantage	to	mount	a	flywheel	on	the	engine.		 
This will assist the engine in running at a lower speed so the works can be seen.  A good size is from 2 to 3  
inch diameter and 4 to 6 ounces in weight.  Of course the youngsters will want to see how fast it will go, and  
in	such	cases	the	engine	can	be	operated	with	out	a	flywheel	or	with	only	a	light	flywheel.		In	such	cases,	 
the maximum RPM will be about 3800 to 4000 RPM at 30 PSI of air pressure. 
