----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

HM1 Instruction Manual 

                 Graham Industries 
                   PO Box 15230 
            Rio Rancho, NM  87174-0230 
                FAX  (505) 715-4527 
                www.grahamind.com 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------


----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

                                      HM1 Steam Engine Kit Parts List 

Main Bag 

   1    80006    Instruction Manual 
   1    39011    Abrasive Paper, 400 grit 
   1   A2023     Flywheel 

Bag A 

   3    10001    Nut, 0-80, 3/32” AF 
   5    10212    Machine Screw, 0-80 x 3/16” Pan Head Slot, Stainless Steel 
   6    10808    Machine Screw, 0-80 x 1/8” Hex Head, Brass 
   4    10820    Machine Screw, 0-80 x 5/16” Hex Head, Brass 
   1    12608    Set Screw, 2-56 x 1/8”, Stainless Steel 
   8    12812    Machine Screw, 2-56 x 3/16” Hex Head, Brass 
   1    17808    Shoulder Bolt, 0-80, Hex Head, Brass 
   1    19000    Nut, 00-90, 5/64” AF, Brass 
   1    40009    O-Ring, AS-568-009, Buna-N 
   1    40030    Wrench, Hex Key, .035” AF 
   1    40043    E-Ring, E-18 
   1    51011    Wrench, Combination Open End 3/32 - 5/64 
   1    51101    Wrench, Socket, 3/32” AF 
   1    51102    Wrench, Socket, 1/8” AF 

Bag B 

   2    53068    Crosshead Guide Rods 
   1    53112    Cylinder Mount 
   1    53113    Cylinder 
   1    53115    Cylinder Cover, Plain 
   1    53122    Ferrule, Crosshead to Piston Rod 
   1    53123    Fork, Piston Rod to Connecting Rod 
   1    53124    Crosshead Guide Support 
   1    53125    Connecting Rod 
   1    53127    Slide Valve 
   1    53133    Steam Chest Cover 

Bag C 

   1   A1005     Steam Pipe Assembly 
   1   A1006     Exhaust Pipe Assembly 
   1   A2015     Piston and Rod Assembly 
   1   A2016     Crosshead Assembly 
   1   A2017     Steam Chest Assembly 
   2   A2018     Bearing Assembly 
   1   A2020     Valve Spindle Assembly 
   1   A2021     Cylinder Cover Assembly with Seal 
   1   A2022     Crankshaft Assembly 

Bag D 

   1    53105    Base 
   1   A2019     Eccentric Strap Assembly 
   1    80007    Gasket Set 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------


----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Introduction 

Thank you for purchasing the HM1 horizontal mill steam engine assembly kit.  The kit is completely machined  
and will require only common hand tools to assemble. 

The HM1 is not a scale model of any engine.  It is a miniature steam engine that is in the style of steam  
engines used to power electric generators, small factories, machine shops and similar activities.  These  
engines were common during the latter part of the 19th century and into the early decades of the 20th  
century. 

As engines are reduced in size, the operating speed tends to increase.  A large engine of this design would  
have a maximum speed of only a few hundred revolutions per minute (RPM).  To provide a more realistic  
running appearance, the valve operation on the HM1 has been optimized for low speed operation.  This  
increases the steam usage slightly, compared to a design where efficiency is the prime concern.  The HM1  
has a maximum speed of 2,000 to 2,500 RPM.  After the engine has been run for a few hours to break it in,  
the minimum speed will be less than 400 RPM. 

General Notes 

The first time a part is referenced in the text, the part number will follow the name of the part.  In some  
cases, the part number may be repeated later in the text to clarify situations where parts may have similar  
names.  Part numbers are five characters long.  Individual parts will have part numbers beginning with a  
number.  Part numbers beginning with the letter “A” are assemblies, consisting of two or more parts that  
have been pre-assembled. 

The parts identification drawing shows each assembly along with the individual parts used in the assembly.   
The parts list shows only the assembly part number. 

The HM1 can be adjusted to run either direction.  The direction of rotation of a steam engine of this style was  
referred to as “running under” or “running over”.  When an engine is running over, the top of the flywheel  
is moving towards the cylinder, and when running under, the top of the flywheel is moving away from the  
cylinder.  Unless there was a compelling reason not to, this style engine was always set to run under.  When  
running under, the vertical pressure on the crosshead by the connecting rod is always downward -- the same  
direction as gravity.  When running over, the pressure lifts the crosshead during power strokes.  At the end of  
each power stroke, gravity would cause the crosshead to fall.  While this really did not hurt anything (a little  
extra wear), it did make a clanking noise that irritated the engine operating engineer and reflected badly on  
his reputation.  The noise could only be eliminated if the crosshead to crosshead guide clearances were very  
carefully adjusted.  On some engines, this clearance was not adjustable. 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

General Procedures 

A set of laser cut gaskets is included in the kit.  The set includes two extra cylinder cover gaskets and one  
extra steam chest gasket.  To remove the gaskets from the sheet, it will be necessary to cut the small tabs  
holding the gaskets in place.  When installing the gaskets, place a drop of oil on the gasket so the gasket  
becomes soaked with oil.  This makes the gasket material softer so it will comply with any surface imper- 
fections and helps hold the gasket in place while screws are inserted. 

All mating surfaces must be finished flat and smooth.  The process used is similar to lapping and will be  
referred to as lapping in the instructions, but it is not a true lapping method.  To make a surface flat and  
smooth, use the abrasive paper supplied in the kit.  Place the abrasive paper on a hard flat surface with  
the abrasive side up.  The surface does not need to be extremely flat like a surface plate.  Common sur- 
faces that are satisfactory are pressure laminate counter tops, table saw surfaces or a piece of plate glass.   
Put a few drops of light oil on the abrasive paper.  Place the part on the paper and rub it in a circular man- 
ner for a new strokes.  Rotate the part 90 degrees and rub a few more strokes.  Repeat until the part has  
been rotated a full circle.  Remove the part and clean it so no trace of abrasive remains.  Dish washing  
detergent and a small brush used with hot water works well for cleaning.  A simple wipe with a rag is not  
adequate. 

Become familiar with the parts contained in the kit by comparing the parts with the parts identification  
drawing and the parts list.  In most cases, it will not be necessary to remove the parts from the packages.   
Look over the assembly drawings and photographs to get an overview of where and how the parts are  
installed. 

The HM1 kit contains approximately 65 parts.  As many of the parts are very small, be careful when open- 
ing the parts packages to prevent loss of any of these parts.  A shallow tray or dinner plate is useful for  
holding parts while assembling the engine.  A clean, well lighted area is essential. 

Assembly 

During assembly, it is suggested that you mark each paragraph of the instructions as you complete it.   
This will help you to avoid skipping a section should you be interrupted during the assembly process. 

Begin by “lapping” all the mating and working surfaces.  Refer to the General Procedures section on lap- 
ping if necessary.  The areas that require lapping are: 

•   Both open ends of the cylinder (53113) 
•   The port face of the cylinder (the side with the 3 openings) 
•   The valve face (53127) with the shallow rectangular opening 
•   Both sides of the steam chest assembly (A2017) 
•   The flat side of the steam chest cover (53133) 
•   The flat side of the cylinder cover assembly (A2021) 
•   One side of the plain cylinder cover (53115 

If you intend to polish your engine, polish these parts at the same time you lap them. 

Clean all of the lapped parts.  Be sure no abrasive residue remains in the steam passages in the  
cylinder or in the seals on each end of the steam chest and cylinder cover assembly. 

Install the piston O-Ring (40009) in the groove of the piston assembly (A2015). 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                                                         Place the cylinder on end with the port face to the left and the  
                                                         mounting face toward you. 

                                                         Install the cylinder cover assembly on the top end of the cylin- 
                                                         der using an oiled gasket.  Using the 3/32” hex socket wrench  
                                                         (51101), install four 0-80 x 1/8” hex head screws (10808) to  
                                                        attach the cylinder cover.  Snug but DO NOT tighten the bolts. 

                                                         Place a drop of oil in the piston rod hole on the cylinder cover  
                                                        assembly.  Place a drop of oil on the O-ring on the piston as- 
                                                         sembly and on the piston rod. 

                                                         Insert the piston assembly, rod end first, into the open end  
                                                         of the cylinder, passing the piston rod through the seal in the  
                                                        cylinder cover assembly. 

Press the piston completely into the cylinder so it touches the cylinder cover assembly.  Loosen the four bolts  
holding the cylinder cover, then gently snug the two screws AWAY from the port face.  Now tighten the two  
screws NEAREST the port face.  Now remove the two screws farthest away from the port face.  Later, the  
two cross guide rods (53068) will be installed where the screws were removed. 

The purpose of this last exercise is to center the cylinder cover assembly and seal on the cylinder bore.  To  
check this, slide the piston from one end to the other in the cylinder, using the piston rod.  It may feel a  
little stiff as the seals will remain tight until the engine has run for a few hours.  However, it should feel even  
from one end to the other. 

                                                                        Test fit the valve spindle assembly in the slots  
                                                                        in  the  valve  (53127).    The  spindle  must  drop  
                                                                        into the narrow slots with the enlarged section  
                                                                        engaged  in  the  wide  slot.    The  valve  must  be  
                                                                        free to move on the spindle so it can seat on the  
                                                                        cylinder port face.  If the spindle is tight in any of  
                                                                        the valve slots, open the slot up SLIGHTLY with  
                                                                        a small file or the abrasive paper supplied in the  
                                                                        kit. 

                                                                        Remove the valve spindle from the valve.  Place  
                                                                        a drop of oil in the hole on each end of the steam  
chest (A2017).  This is to lubricate the seals that the valve spindle passes through.  Insert the threaded end  
of the valve spindle through one of the seal holes from the inside of the steam chest.  Slide it in until the  
other end will fit inside the steam chest.  Then slide this end through the seal on the other end of the steam  
chest.  Center the enlarged portion of the spindle in the steam chest. 

                                                                        Coat the port face of the cylinder with oil.  Place  
                                                                        a gasket on the port face.  Place the valve on the  
                                                                        port  face  with  the  shallow  recess  covering  the  
                                                                        port openings in the cylinder.  With the threaded  
                                                                        end of the valve spindle in the same direction as  
                                                                        the threaded end of the piston rod, set the steam  
                                                                        chest on the cylinder and align it so the valve  
                                                                        spindle drops into the slots in the valve. 

                                                                        Secure the chest to the cylinder using two 0-80 x  
                                                                        5/16” hex head screws (10820).  DO NOT attempt  
                                                                        to tighten these screws as the threaded holes in  
                                                                        the cylinder are not deep enough to permit the  
screws to tighten onto the steam chest. 

Thread the 00-90 nut (19000) on the valve spindle. 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

  Mount the cylinder to the cylinder mount (53112)  
  using four 0-80 x 3/16” pan head slotted stainless  
  steel screws (10212). 

Attach the cylinder mount to the base (53105) using  
four  2-56  x  3/16”  hex  head  screws.    The  threaded  
ends  of  the  piston  rod  and  valve  spindle  face  the  
opposite end of the base. 

  Thread a 0-80 nut (10001) on each crosshead guide  
  rod (53068). 

  Install  the  crosshead  guide  rods  into  the  two  
  empty holes in the cylinder cover.  The rods should  
  be threaded in as far as possible with only finger  
  pressure, and for appearance purposes, should then  
  be adjusted so the ends are an equal distance from  
  the  cylinder.    Tighten  the  nuts  onto  the  cylinder  
  cover. 

  Slide  the  crosshead  assembly  (A2016)  on  the  
  crosshead guide rods so the large hole is centered  
  on the piston rod.  The taper on the crosshead guide  
  bearings can face either toward or away from the  
  cylinder. 

  Slide the crosshead guide support (53124) on the  
  crosshead guide rods and secure it to the base with a  
  0-80 x 3/16” pan head slotted stainless steel screw. 

  Slide the crosshead assembly against the crosshead  
  guide support. 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

                                                                Place the ferrule (53122) on the piston rod with the  
                                                                small  hole  in  the  ferrule  facing  the  cylinder.    The  
                                                                threads on the piston rod will be concealed inside the  
                                                                ferrule. 

                                                                Insert the connecting rod fork (53123) through the  
                                                                crosshead  assembly  and  slide  the  assembly  to  the  
                                                                piston rod.  The round end of the connecting rod fork  
                                                                will start to enter the ferrule on the piston rod.  Insert  
                                                                a 3/32” blade screwdriver in the slot on the piston and  
                                                                thread the piston rod into the fork.  Leave it slightly  
                                                                loose so the fork can be rotated.  It will be tightened  
                                                                later. 

                                                                Thread the eccentric strap assembly (A2019) 5 turns  
                                                                onto the valve spindle.  Then rotate it until the side  
                                                                that has the bearing protruding faces the slot in the  
                                                                base.    Do  NOT  tighten  the  00-90  nut  on  the  valve  
                                                                spindle. 

Attach one bearing assembly (A2018) to the base near the center of the base using 2-56 x 3/16” hex head  
screws.  The side with the protruding bearing is away from the flywheel slot in the base. 

                                                                Slide the eccentric portion of the flywheel hub (A2023)  
                                                                into the eccentric strap assembly bearing.  Lower the  
                                                                flywheel into the slot in the base.  Slide the crankshaft  
                                                                assembly  (A2022)  through  the  bearing  and  then  
                                                                through the flywheel. 

                                                                Slide the other bearing assembly on the crankshaft  
                                                                with the protruding bearing away from the flywheel.   
                                                                Secure the bearing assembly to the base with 2-56 x  
                                                                3/16” hex head screws. 

                                                                Oil the crankshaft bearings and the eccentric. 

Check that the crankshaft turns freely in the bearing assemblies.  It may be slightly stiff, but should not  
be binding while rotating.  If the crankshaft does not turn freely, loosen all the screws holding the bearing  
assemblies to the base and then tighten them a little at a time so all the screws are tightened evenly. 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

Carefully inspect the connecting rod (53125).  Notice that on one end, the rod has a slight protrusion  
around the hole on one side.  Slide the connecting rod onto the crankpin of the crankshaft assembly so  
this protrusion is next to the crankdisk of the crankshaft.  This spaces the connecting rod away from the  
crankdisk so it does not rub. 

                                                                 Place the other end of the connecting rod in the slot  
                                                                 in  the  fork  attached  to  the  crosshead.    Move  the  
                                                                 piston and/or rotate the crankshaft until the holes in  
                                                                 the fork line up with the hole in the connecting rod.   
                                                                 Place the head of the shoulder bolt (17808) into the  
                                                                 3/32” hex wrench and use it to hold the bolt while  
                                                                 you insert the bolt through the fork and connecting  
                                                                 rod.  Start it from the side nearest the crosshead  
                                                                 guide rods.  Place a 0-80 nut on the shoulder bolt  
                                                                 and tighten. 

                                                                 Hold the connecting rod with needle nose pliers near  
                                                                 the crosshead.  Place tape or paper on the jaws of  
                                                                 the  pliers  to  keep  from  scratching  the  connecting  
                                                                 rod.    Now  tighten  the  piston  into  the  crosshead  
                                                                 guide  with  a  screwdriver  in  the  slot  of  the  piston  
while keeping the fork from rotating by holding the connecting rod with the pliers.  When finished, the fork  
must not bind on the connecting rod. 

                                                                 Slide  the  eccentric  strap  back  onto  the  eccentric  
                                                                 hub  of  the  flywheel  because  it  will  have  probably  
                                                                 fallen off by now.  A groove will  be visible in the  
                                                                 eccentric.  Rotate the flywheel so the eccentric strap  
                                                                 moves as far away from the base as possible.  The  
                                                                 set screw hole in the flywheel will be approximately  
                                                                 on top.  Place the points of the E-ring (40043) into  
                                                                 the groove of the eccentric.  Press the ring down  
                                                                 until  it  snaps  in  place.    The  points  will  center  up  
                                                                 on  the  crankshaft  to  keep  the  ring  from  rotating.   
                                                                 Rotate the flywheel while observing the E-ring.  If  
                                                                 properly installed, the outer edge of the ring will be  
                                                                 concentric with the eccentric strap. 

                                                                 Install the 2-56 set screw (12608) in the flywheel  
hub but do not tighten. 

NOTE:  When tightening the set screw in the following steps, position the flywheel on the crankshaft so it is  
near but not touching the bearing at the crankdisk end of the crankshaft.  The crankdisk should be touching  
the bearing. 

                                                                  Rotate the crankshaft until the crankpin is nearest  
                                                                  the cylinder.  Make sure the setscrew in the flywheel  
                                                                  is still on top.  Tighten the setscrew. 

                                                                  Observe the valve in the steam chest while rotating  
                                                                  the flywheel.  The valve will uncover a portion of  
                                                                  the cylinder ports at each end of its travel.  At each  
                                                                  extreme of travel, the amount of the port uncovered  
                                                                  should be the same.  If it is not, rotate the valve  
                                                                  spindle with needle nose pliers until the amount of  
                                                                  port uncovered at each end is the same. 

                                                                  Rotate  the  flywheel  until  the  crankpin  is  nearest  
                                                                  the cylinder again.  Observe the valve.  Both ports  
                                                                  should be covered.  If both ports are not covered,  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

loosen the set screw and repeat the last two steps until the ports are covered in both positions of the piston. 

Tighten the 00-90 nut on the valve spindle. 

Place two drops of oil in the steam chest around the valve.  Press the valve against the cylinder port face.   
The oil will help hold the valve in place. 

                                                         Remove the two bolts holding the steam chest in  
                                                         place.  Install the steam chest cover (53133) using  
                                                         an oiled gasket and the two screws just removed  
                                                         plus two more 0-80 x 5/16” hex head screws.  Try to  
                                                         ensure the valve stays against the cylinder face. 

                                                         Install the plain cylinder cover (53115) with an oiled  
                                                         gasket using four 0-80 x 1/8” hex head screws. 

                                                         Screw the 3/32” diameter steam pipe assembly  
                                                         (A1005) into the steam chest cover. 

                                                         Screw the 1/8” diameter exhaust pipe assembly  
                                                         (A1006) into the cylinder. 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

Starting Up 

While the engine can be broken in on steam, it is much easier to run it for the first few hours on compressed  
air to develop a running fit on all the parts.  It will require about 15 to 20 PSI of air pressure to start the  
engine the first time.  After about 15 minutes running, the required air pressure will drop to about 10 PSI.   
After several hours of running, the engine will run at low speeds at 5 PSI. 

Before starting the engine for the first time, OIL EVERYTHING!  The places that must have oil are: 

      •   Crankshaft bearings 
      •   Crosshead guide rods 
      •   Eccentric hub on the flywheel 
      •   Valve rod fork 
      •   Both ends of the connecting rod 

When running on air, place a few drops of oil in the air line every few hours of operation. 

Connect a 15 to 20 PSI air source to the engine using plastic tubing on the steam pipe assembly on the  
steam chest cover.  Rotate the flywheel so the top of the flywheel moves away from the cylinder.  The engine  
should start to run on its own after just a few tries. 

Do not exceed 20 PSI air pressure for the first hour of operation.  After that, air pressure up to 35 PSI can  
be used.  The speed will not increase greatly at the higher pressures, but torque will increase. 

Steam Operation 

Do not attempt operation on steam until the engine has run for at least one hour on compressed air. 

When operating on steam, the engine will require more lubrication than when operating on air.  Steam is  
very effective at removing grease and oil and is used for this purpose. 

The most effective way to lubricate the engine is with a lubricator in line with the steam supply.  The most  
popular type of lubricator is the displacement lubricator.  If it is used, it should be mounted as close to the  
engine as possible, and after any steam regulating valves or governors.  This type of regulator will not work  
with compressed air.  It works on the principle of a small amount of steam condensing into water, and the  
oil floating on the condensed water. 

A special steam cylinder oil is recommended for lubrication.  It is compounded so it does not wash away from  
the surfaces as easily with steam as does more common oils.  If any superhead it applied to the steam, it  
is essential. 

It is not recommended that superheated steam be used with this engine.  If any is used, it should be only  
moderately superheated.  The use of saturated steam is recommended as the condensation of the steam  
will provide additional lubrication to the engine. 
