2. Starter Motor 
Type of starter motor 
Starter motors are roughly divided into the com­
mon type (conventional type) and reduction type; 

they are subdivided into the Bendix type and 
magnetic shift type (The clutch is available in the 

1. Specifications and Performance 
roller clutch type and multi-plate clutch type.) depending on pinion engagement mechanisms. The L-A series uses the common type, magnetic shift system starter motor as standard. 
Engine model  L40AE-SE -L100AE-SE  I  L40AE-DE -L100AE-DE  L75AE-SE-L 1 OOAE-SE (Optional)  
Type  Conventional  Reduction type  
Model  S114-413A  I  S114-414A  8114-478  
~gjsec.)  30  ~  
Output (V-kW)  12-0.8  12-1.2  
Direction of rotation (viewed from pinion side)  !  Clockwise  -,-Counterclockwise  Clockwise  
Weight kg (lb.)  3.6 (7.9)  4.4 (9.7)  
Clutch system  Over running  ~  
Engagement system  I i  Magnetic shift  ~  
~~· ?!Pi_~i?_~~eth  I  8  ~  
Pinion coming out voltage (V)  8  ~  
No-load Loaded characteristics  I Terminal voltage (V) I Current (A) ·­i Speed (rpm) ! Terminal voltage (V) j Current (A) I J Torque kg-m (ft.-lb)  I ; I I I I  11.5 60 (Max.) 7000 (Min.) 8 200 0.32 (2.31 )/1850 rpm (Min.) (Min.)  I I I I I I  12 105 (Max.) ·­4000 (Min.) 8.7 ~ 0.46 (3.33)/1550 rpm (Min.) (Min.)  

Characteristics Curve 
S114-413Al414A
~e 
3: 6> e (JIS 05004 12-B} 
0 1()0 200 JOO 
Current (A} 
Current (A) 
.>I! .>I! 
g
-~ 
CD
5 ::I 
~
g. 
::I e­
8.
{!.
0 
en 
·..,.. 
12 
f2 
t2.000 
t 2-~~/)1,·
. ' 11'1/l/ 
-!+ 
, 
.. ~ :_011~ 
,,.
1 o 1 o 10.000 
10 
' 'i.r:.:?~:' 
I 
~ 
0.1 
O I 8,000 
a 
J ~.::; 
rr.'(Y
a: 
H­
a.a 
0.8 
6,000 
a 
'0 
~-­
<:f,, 
0.4 
0.4 
4,000 
.. 
H
"" 
t" 
Hi
~ nSpeea
1 '
0.2 
0.2 
2.000 
2 
t-r 
f-4++ 
~ 
' . H-4
er±::... 
,,­
. l+h ·---+ 
~­
0 0 
-> 0 0 
100 200 JOO 400 

Checking and Servicing 
2. Construction 
The starter motor is composed of three major parts, as follows: 
1) 	Magnetic switch 
Moves plunger to engage and disengage pinion and, through the engagement lever, opens and closes the main contact (moving contact) to start and stop the starter motor. 
2) 	Motor 
A continuous current series motor which generates rotational drive power. 
2.1 	Conventional type starter motor (Standard electric starter) 
Magnetic switch 
Field coil 
Brush holder ­
Rear cover bearing metal 
Dustcover 
Thrust washer 
Through bolt 
Rear cover 
3) 	Pinion Transfers driving power from motor to ring 
gear. An over-running clutch is employed to prevent damage if the engine runs too fast The overrun clutch is composed of the roller and clutch outer, as illustrated below. The 
roller is held down the roller in tapered part. The overrun clutch is composed of the roller and clutch outer, as illustrated below. The roller is kept pressed by the roller spring. The clutch outer houses the roller in tapered part. 
Dust cover 
Over-running clutch 
Gear case 
Pinion stopper 
Pinion 
...._---Armature 
'------Yoke 
Over-running clutch 


2.2 Reduction type staretr motor (Option for L75AE-SE -L 100AE-SE) 

1) 	Construction of the reduction type 
Magnetic switch Torsion spring 
starter motor 
This motor is equipped with reduction gears 
between the armature and pinion; the re­
duction gears increase the torque of the 
motor before transmitting the torque to the 
pinion. The pinion and pinion shaft are 
shifted by the magnetic switch but the c!utch 
assembly remains unmoved. 

(1) 	Circumscribed type 
The armature shaft is equipped with a 

small gear at the end, which is constantly 
engaged with a large gear on the circum­

ference of the clutch. Thus, the revolu­tion of the armature is transmitted to the pinion through the reduction gears and the clutch assembly. While the engine is being cranked, the motor emits a slightly loud sound because of the built­in reduction gears. This does not mean, of course, a sign of trouble. 
(2) Internal structure of reduction type Illustration above shows the internal structure of the reduction type starting motor. This motor is similar to the mag­netic shift type motor, except that it has 
a built-in reduction mechanism as its 
name implies. 
In general type of starting motor, the ar­

mature is designed to turn at the same rpm as the pinion. However, the reduc­
tion type motor has its internal resistance reduced to about 25 -33% of the coventional motor to a high-speed low torque motor while being a high torque motor by use of reduction gears. 
Armature 

To prevent the motor from being affected by a shock when the engine starts and over-runs, the starter motor has an over­running clutch. 
RollerRoller Gear 


Key switch  
Main contactor t Battery l~ Field coil  
Ring gear  
Armature  

2) Operation 
Key switch ON 
Series coil 
Shunt coil } are energized 
Plunger is attracted. Pinion and pinion shaft are pushed out by shift lever. 

Pinion is normally Pinion strikes ring gear. 
l~~e_n_g_a_g_e_d_·~~~~~
l 
Pinion is engaged with Pinion is not engaged ring gear. with ring gear. 
Torsion spring and plunger moves again. 
i 	Main contactor closes to carry a large current to motor. 
Rotated armature turns i Rotated armature turns , pinion through reduction i pinion through reduction i gears. 1. gears. 
Ring gear is rotated. Pinion is released from ring gear, and enegaged · ' with ring gear by torsion spring to rotate ring gear. I 
Check if engine has started. Turn key switch OFF. 
Magnetic switch no longer attracts pinion. Main contactor opens. 
Plunger and shift lever are returned to the original position by torsion spring; pinion by pinion return spring. 
Motor (armature) stops. 
I 
Pinion is engaged with ring gear 
Key switch 

Key switch is turned off 
Main contactor .iBattery l.._ coil Field  
Ring /gear  
Armature  



3. Disassembly 
3-1 	Conventional starter motor (Standard) 1) Magnetic switch 
(1) 	
Disconnect the magnetic switch wiring. 

(2) 
Remove the 	magnetic switch· mounting bolt. 

(3) 	
Remove the magnetic switch. 

(
4) Separate the switch shift lever 

(5) 
Remove the torsion spring (for Reduction type Starter Motor only). Pull out the torsion spring on the magnetic switch. 




• 	Check whether the dust cover is kept. It is prone to be lost. 
2) 	Rear cover 
(1) 	
Remove dust cover. 

(2) 
Remove E-ring, 	and remove the thrust washer. Be careful not to lose the washer and shim. 

(3) 
Remove the two through bolts holding the rear cover and the two screws holding the brush holder. 


(4) 	Remove the rear cover. 
• 	
Make sure that the washer and shim are free from damage. 

• 	
Caret ully keep the washer and shim until they are reassembled. 



--~~ 
Dustcover 


3) 	Brush holder 
(1) 	
Lift the (-) brush from the commutator. 

(2) 
Remove the (+) brush from the brush holder. 

(3) 	
Remove the brush holder 


• 	Number of brushes 
(+) brush: 2 
(-) brush: 1 


(Reduction type) 
(1) Removing yoke, armature, and brush holder. Pull out the yoke, armature, and brush holder 
simultaneously. Gently pull out the brush and · commutator, avoiding interference with the 


surrounding section. 3-2 Reduction type (Option) 1) Wiring, Rear cover, yoke and armature 4) Yoke (1) Disconnect the magnetic swich wiring. 
(1) 	Extract the yoke from the armature. (2) Remove the two through bolts. 
• 	Pull it out slowly so that it does not (3) Remove the rear cover, yoke and arma­strike against other parts. ture. 

Through bolt 

2) 	Brush, armature and yoke assy. 
(1) 
Lift the brush spring using the brush spring lifter. Touch the brush spring to the side of the (-) brush and float the brush from the commutator. 

(2) 
Remove the (+) brush from the brush holder. 


• 	Brush: (+) and (-) brush each 2 pcs. 
Brush holder 

6) 	Pinion 
(1) 
Slide the pinion stopper to the pinion side. 

(2) 
Remove the pinion stopper clip using a 
screwdriver. 


(3) 
Remove the pinion from the armature. 


(3) 
Remove the brush holder. 

(4) 	
Remove the armature and yoke assem­bly. 









Yoke assyBrush holder 

O·'-~ 
3) 	Magnetic switch 
(1) 	
Remove the magnetic switch mounting bolts. 

(2) 	
Remove the magnetic switch. 

(3) 
Separate the torsion spring from the magnetic switch. 




4) 	Dust cover and shi~ lever 
(1) Separate the dust cover and shift lever. 


5) 	Clutch assembly (with pinion shaft) 
(1) 
Remove the gear case/housing mounting screws. 

(2) 
Remove the clutch assembly (w/pinion shaft) from the gear case. 



6) 	Clutch disassembly 
(1) Move the pinion stopper toward the pin­ion and remove the pinion stopper clip with a minus screwdriver. 
Pinion stopper clip 

(2) Remove the pinion stopper and return spring, and the pinion shaft from the clutch assembly. 
Clutch assy 


Retaining ring Pinion stopper 

4. 	Inspection Check the reduction type starter motor in the 
same way as the conventional type. 
1) Armature 

(1) 	Armature coil ground test Use a circuit tester to check for the in­
sulation between the commutator piece and the shaft (or armature core). If an insulation failure is detected, replace 
the armature. 


a) 	Armature coil shortcircuit test 
Place the iron piece (a saw-like one) 
on 	the armature fitted to the layer 
short tester and turn the armature by 
hand. If the iron piece vibrates, it 
implies a short circuit and the arma­
ture should be replaced. 

b) 	Commutator 
Inspect the surface of the commuta­
tor. If it is corroded or pitted, grind 
with #500 -#600 sandpaper. Replace 

the commutator if damage is irrepa­
rable. 	· 

l  
WearMaintenance  
Istandard limit  
Commutator  
outside diameter See separate service data  
(P.83). 
Commutator run-out  

c) 	Armature shaft outside diameter Measure the outside diameter of the armature shaft at four locations: front, center, end, and pinion. Replace the 
armature if the shaft is excessively worn. Check the bend of the shaft; replace 
the armature if the bend exceeds 0.08 mm (0.0031 in.) 



(2) Depth of commutator insulating material Check the insulating material for depth. The depth is within a range from 0.5 to 0.8 mm, the commutator is acceptable. Correct with a 
hacksaw blade when the under cut is too 
shallow (0.2 mm tolerable limit) 

-\ 
Hacksaw 


1-----1 Hacksaw blade 
blade 

Commutator Commutator Bad Good 

Commutator 
Bad 	Good 
mm (in.) 

Maitenance Repair  
standard I limit  
Insulating See separate service data  
material (P.83).  

2) 	Field coil 
(1) 	Open test 
Check the field coil for disconnection and 
grounding. 
Check the continuity between the termi­

nals connecting the field coil brushes. Continuity indicates the coil is opened. If not, replace the coil. 


(2) 	
Short-circuit test Check the continuity between the yoke and any field coil terminal. Continuity 

indicates that the coil is shorted and it must be replaced. 


(3) 
Cleaning the inside of the yoke If any carbon powder or rust has been 


deposited in the yoke, blow the yoke out with dry compressed air. 
* 	Do not remove the field coil from the yoke. 


3) 	Magnetic switch 
(1) Shunt coil cotinuity test Check the continuity between the C ter­minal and the magnetic switch body (metal part). If discontinuity is detected 
replace the magnetic switch, whose shunt coil is disconnected. 

Checking and Servicing 
contact is faulty and that the contactor must be replaced. 


1.13Q

Coil resistance (at 20°C) 
(Reduction type: 0.6Q) 
(2) 	Series coil continuity test Check the continuity between the termi­
nal C and M of the magnetic switch is detected. 


ICoil resistance (at 20°C) 0.330 
(3) Contact test of contactor Push the plunger with your finger and 
check the continuity between the M ter­minal and B terminal. If discontinuity, the 
4) 	Pinion 
(1) 
Inspect the pinion teeth and replace the pinion if the teeth is excessively worn or damaged. 

(2) 
Check if the pinion slides smoothly; re­place the pinion if faulty 

(3) 	
Inspect the springs and replace if faulty. 

(4) 	
Replace the clutch if it slips or seizes. 


5) 	Brush The brushes are quickly worn down by the motor. When the brushes are deflective, the output of the motor will drop. 

Checking and Servicing 

(1) 	Brush dimensions 
Replace brushes which have been worn beyond the specified wear limit. 
14mm (0.55") 

Wear limit 


11 mm (0.43") 
(Reduction NEW USED 
type: 16 mm 
(0.63")) 

(2) 	
Brush appearance and movement in brush holder 

If the outside of the brush is damaged, replace it. If the movement of the brushes in the brush holder is hampered because the holder is rusted, repair or replace the holder. 

(3) 
Brush spring 


Since the brush spring pushes the brush against the commutator while the motor is running, a weak or delective spring will cause excessive brush wear, resulting in sparking between the brush and the commutator during operation. Measure the spring force with a spring balance; replace the spring when the difference between the standard value and the measured value exceeds ±0.2kg. 
t 
Spring balance 

Brush spring 


IStandard spring load 2.0kg 
CAUTION: 
Whenever overhauling the motor or removing the brush, apply high quality grease to the specified greasing point. This extends the service life of the bearing on the brush side, although the bearing uses an oilless alloy. 
(4) Brush holder ground test Check the continuity between the insu­lated brush holder ( +) and the base ((-) grounding) of the brush holder as­sembly. Continuity indicates that these 
two points are grounded and that the holder must be replaced. 


5. Adjustment and Performance test 2) Pinion movement 
1) f-size measurement (gap between pin­ion and pinion stopper) 
[Conventional starter motor] 
When the pinion is at the projected position, 
measure the gap between pinion and pinion 
stopper. This measurement should be made with 
the pinion pressed back lightly to take up any 
play in engagement linkage. 

mm (in.) 
f dimension 

0.3 -2.5 (0.012 -0.098) 

Pressing the pinion i dimentions 

Measuring of f dimension 

[Reduction type] Connect the wiring as shown in the sketch below. Turn on the switch and measure the • f ' dis­tance in the pinion thrust direction. mm (in.) 
i dimension 


0.3 -1.5 (0.012 -0.059) 

Switch 

To measure the f dimension, connect the <.:£) wire of the battery to the S terminal, and the 8 wire to the starter motor. When attracting the plunger and pushing out the pinion with the shift lever, push (or draw) the pinion by finger in the arrow direction. 
Make  sure  the pinion does  not  chatter  
before, the  measurement.  
Switch  


3) Plunger movement (Applicable also to 
the reduction type) 
Adjustment the stroke of magnetic plunger 
to the prescribed value. Adjust the f di­
mension installing shim (adjusting plate) on 
the magnetic switch board. 

There are two types of shim: 0.5 mm 
(0.0197 in.) and 0.8 mm (0.0315 in.) in 
thickness. 


Dustcover 
Adjusting shim 
(0.5 mm, 0.8 mm) 
(0.02 in, 0.03in) 

4) 	Mesh clearance (Applicable also to the 
reduction type) Mesh clearance is the distance between the flywheel ring gear and starter motor pinion in the rest position. This clearance must be 3 mm (0.1181 in.) to 5 mm (0.1969 in.). 
3 -5 mm (0.118-0.197in.) 


6. 	Reassembly precautions When reassembling the starter motor in the 
reverse order of diassembly, paying a special attention to the following points: 
(1) 	
Where to grease 

• 	
Gears in the gear case 

• 	
Operating part of the shift lever 

• 	
Sliding part of the pinion 

• 	
Plunger sliding part of the magnetic switch 



(2) 
Torsion spring and shift lever Hook the torsion spring into the hole in the magnetic switch and insert the shift lever into 


the notch in the plunger of the magnetic switch (through the torsion spring). 

Torsion spring 

(3) Mounting the magnetic switch Attach the magnetic switch and shift lever 
assembly to the gear case. Fix the magnetic switch with M6 lock bolts. Be sure to install the dust cover before 
assembling the gear case (Tightning torque: 65 -80 kg-cm (4.71 -5.80 lb-ft)). After reassembly, check by conducting no­load operation. 

7. 	Characteristics test The some characteristics can be checked 
easily by the no-load test procedure described below. 
• 	The test should be carried out immediately because the rating of the starter motor is 30 seconds. 
1) 	No-load test Fix a starter motor on a test bench. Con­nect wiring to the motor as illustrated. Close the switch, and current flows through the motor, which is rotated at no-load. Measure working current, voltage, and motor revolu­tions. Check whether the specified charac­teristics are satisfied. 
Shunt 


8. Maintenance Standards 

3. Generator (Dynamo), Regulator and Rectifier 

The standard dynamo for the L-A type engine manufactured to the electric starting specification is rated at 12 V and 3A. Optionally available are dynamos of the 12 V system, which are rated at 1A, 1.7A and 15A. Also available are dynamos 
1. Specifications 
rated at 12V-35W, 12V-40W, 6V-15W, which are used exclusively for lighting of engines to the recoil, S specification. 
• Recoil specification: L40AE -L70AE 

Notes: 
The dynamo may be combined with:­
(1)  RS5133 type regulator (with a built-in safety relay drive circuit).  
(2)  RS2190 type regulator (without the charge lamp circuit),  or  
(3)  RS511O type regulator (with a built-in safety relay drive circuit), and  
(4)  The dynamo used only for lighting of engines to the recoil, S-spec. is equipped with neither a  
regulator nor rectifier, and outputs AC voltage.  

2. 	Construction The dinamo is composed of the starter coil 
and rotor; the stator is bolted to the cylinder block, and the rotor to the flywheel. 


Flywheel 
Voltage (VAC) 
3. Generator check 
Follow the directions to check whether the generator works normally. 
(1) 
Disconnect the generator output from the regulator, with the generator left coupled with the engine. 

(2) 
Connect the generator output to a volt/ ammeter. 

(3) 	
Set the volt/ammeter to the 100 VAC range. 

(4) 
Start the engine and check the volt/amme­ter. 

(5) 
When the volt/ammeter reads the specified value, the generator is in normal operation. (Measure voltage between the connectors.) 



GP9585  GP9589  GP9587  GP9595  
3750 rpm  Approx. 35.7  Approx. 53.8 Approx. 46  Approx. 45.4 Approx. 39  Approx. 41 .5 Approx. 35.5  
3200 rpm  Approx. 30.3  

CD Stator coil continuity test 
Disconnect the green/white wire to the dynamo 
or red and black connectors. Check the stator 
coil for continuity using a circuit tester. If 
continuity is not detected (coQ), replace the 
stator coil, which is disconnected 
A Note 
When the megger is used, short the circuit within 1 or less second. 
® Coil insulation test Remove the green and white, or red and black conductors from the dynamo. 
1. 	
Connect a cable from the megger (or cir­cuit tester) to the G/W wire or red con­nector. 

2. 	
Connect the other cable from the megger (or circuit tester) to the cylinder block for 1 or less second, and check the indicator 


If the voltage is too low or OV, the magnet is demagnetized or disconnected. 
of the megger (or circuit tester). 
If there is continuity (the registance is 
zero), replace the stator coil. 


Tester's reading  Continuity  Evaluation  
00  NO  Normal  - 
on  YES  Abnormal  Replace  
the stator  
coil  

Stator coil 

Meg1;1er or circuit tester 
G/Wwire 
'(Red) 
I .,. 

Cylinder G/W wire Free 
block (Black) 

G) Inspection of dynamo /regulator (combination) To inspect the dynamo/regulator, connect a 
voltmeter and ammeter to the dynamo/regu­lator circuit, as illustrated below. 
Use a battery capable of running the engine. 


GNJ 
w 


Regulator 
RS5112
GP9587 
GP9595 
Voltmeter 

Relationship between charge current and battery terminal voltage (at 3600rpm) 
Evaluation  Cause  
14V or less 2A or more (GP9587) 13.5 A or more (~P9595) I ' 14 -15V 2-0.2A (GP9587) I (within a range of voltages 13.5 -0.3A (GP9595) Iregulated by the regulator) -----~ 2A or more (GP9587) I 15Vor more (reference) 13.5A or more (GP9595) 1  Normal Normal Abnormal  I -­I -­Replace the regulator, which is faulty.  
15V or less; charge current OA  The regulator or dynamo is faulty, or wires are improperly connected.  
A charge current flows but the battery fails to attain a desired terminal voltage. (The battery is dis­charged.)  Replace the battery, which is faulty.  



.... $ Cl) !~  ~ 1  2  3  4  5  6  
I:c ' Ql i ·= ·~ I -o' C1l :~ ! ..:.:: i~i CD  1 2 3 4 5 Case  ----­1 OFF 2 OFF 6 ON ...._____ 7 OFF I 11 ON 12 OFF ...._____ ! 16 OFF 17 OFF 18 OFF 21 ON, 22 ON 23 ON i 26 OFF ! 27 OFF i 28 OFF  3 OFF 8 OFF 13 OFF -----­24 OFF 29 OFF  4 9 OFF OFF 14 OFF 19 OFF ---­30 OFF  5 OFF 10 OFF 15 OFF 20 OFF 25 ON -----­ 

Terminal No. 
1 2 3 4 5 

Symptom  Faulty point No.  Probable cause  
The charge lamp does not turn off.  24:0N·  The harness between the charge lamp and terminal No.4 of the regulator is likely to interfere with the body.  
5: OFF, 26: ON  The battery is likely to be connected in reverse.  
The fusible link is fused.  5: ON, 26: ON  The regulator is likely to be poorly insulated within it or the battery is likely to be connected in reverse.  
The battery is insufficiently charged or the charge lamp does not turn off.  6:0FF, 11: OFF  In the regulator the circuit is likely to be opened because of poor soldering.  
The battery is insufficiently charged or the charge lamp turns off at higher revolutions of the engine.  6or11: OFF  In the regulator the circuit is likely to be opened because of poor soldering.  
The battery is insufficiently charged or the charge lamp does not turn on.  10 or 15: ON  The battery is likely to be connected in reverse.  

© Inspection of discrete regulator (simplified inspection) Check the continuity between the terminals on 
a discrete regulator listed the table below. The continuity between the regulator case and each terminal must also be checked. The values in the table were obtained in the nor­mal condition. Note that this simplified in-
RSS112 
Red lead wire ( +) 


i""' 
Tester 
spection is not intended to detect all failures and trouble in the regulator. 

Notes: 
1. 	
Use a tester at a range of 1SJ.. ON: The pointer moves OFF: The pointer does not move 

2. 	
Be sure to inspect a desired regulator while checking it agaunst a normal one. 


RS2190 

Tester


I""' 
... No. 
1


ffi~
~ 	!Termi­
,nal No. 

1

:c 
~ 
2 
OFF

·~ 
'O 
3 

OFF .9.l 
ca 
4 OFF

-U I 
&l I 5 

OFF 
Red lead wire(+) 
2 
ON 
...._____ 
OFF OFF OFF 
3 
ON 
OFF 

OFF 
OFF 

4 
OFF OFF OFF 
OFF 

5 
ON 
ON 
ON 
OFF 

Note: 
Terminal Nos. are the same as those listed above. 
Checking and Servicing 

®Inspection of rectifier 
(1) ZR2117 (Half-wave rectifier) 
p 
N 
Female 

~11 Male
Male 

+(Red) 
Tester 

-(Black)
'-----l !'.._,_____. 
Tester 

(2) ZR2120 (Full-and half-wave rectifier) 
CZ) Female spigot 

(j) Male spigot 
Female -(Black) +(Red) 
Continuity (Normal) Replace the 
No 
rectifier if the left require-Yes 
ments are not met. 

® Round spigot 
Diode A Diode B 
Diode C 

Diode D 
I 
Continuity

~· 
(Normal)
CD I CD ! CD CD I CD 
© 
CD

© 
' 
I 
I Replace the 
-I I + I 
-
No
-
-
++ + 

I 
rectifier if the left Tester Yes

-
-
-

-
++ + + 
requirements are not met. 




Rated output  400W  
Rated current  33.3A  
Rated voltage  DC 12V  
Rated operating  Pre-heating:  15 sec.  
time  Engine operation:  30 sec. max.  
Engin~ stop:  30 sec.  
Range of  
operating  -30°C (-22°F} or higher  
temperature  
Earth polarity  Negative earth/Body earth  

4. Air Heater (Optional) An air heater is available for warming intake air during starting in cold weather. The air heater is mounted on the end of the intake bend. The device is operated by the key switch on the instrument panel. A timer is used for the pre-heating. When the air heater key switch is turned on, the pilot lamp lights. The timer is set so that the pilot lamp goes off 15 sec. after the system is turned on. When the pilot lamp goes off, once turn the key switch off. Then, turn the key switch to the START position to start the engine. 
An air heater system circuit consists of an air heater, pilot lamp and timer. 

Air heater system circuit (without timer) 
Main switch 
: Battery 
= 
Air heater 
Air heater circuit (with timer) 
Pre-heat 
'Tr'--------.---a Switch 

Battery Air heater Pilot lamp 
"::' 

5. Battery The battery is used to start the engine (or to bear a lamp load) and must be well charged. Do not use a poorly charged battery which may b,e 
unable to attain the motor revolutions required to start the engine at low temperature. 
1. 	Battery capacity and battery cables 1) Battery capacity 
Recommended battery capacity (20 hrs rating) Ambient temperature 
18AH  24AH  30AH  35AH  40AH  45AH  
L40AE/L48AE  -10°C (14°F) or higher  -30°C (-22°F) or higher  
L60AE/L70AE  -10°C (14°F) or higher  -30°C (-22°F) or higher  
L75AE -L 1 OOAE  - - - -10°c (14°F) or higher  -30°C(-22°F) or higher  

2) 	Battery cable To connect the battery to the starter, thick 
and short wires must be used. (low-voltage 
cables for automobile [AV wire]). 
Using wire other than that specified may 

cause the following troubles: 
I Single conductor wire 
Wire thinner than specified 
Wire longer than specified 

High wiring resistance  ,,. Open circuit caused by vibrations  
Low current  
Faulty starting  Faulty charging  

2. Battery inspection 
(1) Check the electrolyte level in each cell. If the level is insufficient, add distilled water to attain the upper limited level. 
Upper level 

Electrolyte level 
Good Low 	High



jJI l[jJ= # 

?777//////; 

Check the electrolyte level every 7 to 1 O days. The electrolyte must be kept 1 O -20 mm (0.3937 -0.7874 in.) over the top of the plates. 
(2) 	
Check the battery case for loose parts, cracks or flaws. 

(3) 	
Check the battery terminals for looseness and rusting. 

(4) 	
Check the battery cap for clogged vent holes. 

(5) 
Test each cell by drawing electrolyte into the hydrometer. 


Specific Gravilty: 1.27 -1.29 {Type II) 

1.26 -1.28 {Type I) 

Note: 
Rubber buld 
Glass tube 

Hydrometer 


Hydrometer -i+--+­


Variation of Specific Gravity with Temperature 

• 	
Do not overfill the battery. Wipe up spilled • The battery must be replaced if sulfation is electrolyte at once and flush well with evident. water. 

• 	The battery must be replaced if there are 

• 	
The specific gravity varies with the tem­pastes settled on the bottom of each cell. perature as shown in the accompanying table. 


Checking and Servicing 

WARNING 	CAUTION: 

1. 	
Carfully protect yourself and your clothes against the battery electrolyte which is diluted sulfuric acid hard enough to injure the skin and eyes. If any injury is anticipated, consult the doctor at once. 

2. 	
When using the dynamos (combined with a regulator) on the engine, carefully check the battery for terminal voltage. If the terminal voltage is too low, the regulator works so that the dynamo fails to supply the voltage (about 6V or more) required to charge the battery. If so, use a battery charger. 


3. 	Battery charging 
1) Remove the battery; remove the cap from each cell. 2) Connect the charger positive ( +) cable to the battery positive terminal. 3) Connect the charger negative (-) cable to the battery negative terminal. 
• 	Charging current: 
Battery current 20 hrs. rating -10 hrs. rating. 
Example: 20 hrs. rating 45 AH, battery 
(45 + 20) -(45 + 10) =2.25A -4.5A 

Charging: 
Charging the battery until specific gravity is 1.270 -1.290 at 20°C (68°F). (lncase of the battery of Type 1: 1.260 -1.280) 
I 	,WARNING I 
• 	
Before charging remove the cap from each cell. 

• 	
Keep fire and sparks from a charging battery. 

• 	
Turn power on/off at the charger, not at the battery terminals. 

• 	
Discontinue charging if the electrolyte tem­perature exceeds 45°C {113°F). 


Quick-charging should only be done in an emergenecy; slow-charging is preferred. 
After installing the battery, coat the terminals with clean grease. 
Checking and Servicing 

4.13 ADJUSTMENT 
1. 	Adjustment of fuel injection timing Fuel injection timing must be precise. If it is too early or too late, a host of trouble will result in: difficulty in starting, knocking, lowered output, poor exhaust color, etc. Correctly ad­just the governor linkage assembly and the injection pressure before adjusting the injec­tion timing. When the engine is used for long 
periods of time, the injection pump plunger wears out and distorts the timing. If the plunger is worn, replace it and read-just 

the injection timing. 
1) How to check the injection timing. 

• 	
Set the speed control handle to "Run". 

• 	
Remove the fuel injection pipe, and install the injection timing measurement pipe. 

• 	
Match the TD position mark on the fly­wheel with the V notch line on the cylin­der body fin. 

• 	
Turn the flywheel first clockwise then couterclockwise about 30° from the TD mark to make sure fuel is injected. {If it is not, turn the flywheel once). 

• 	
Turn the flywheel slowly untill fuel flows out of the pipe. When the fuel begins to flow, check the angle using the mark on the flywheel. 

• 	
Repeat three or four times to make sure the reading is correct. 



High-pressure
pipe 

30-50 mm 
(1.2 -2.0 in.) 
Fuel injection pump 
(Measurement pipe) 
2) 	How to adjust the injection timing 
• 	
Remove the fuel injection pump and base. 

• 	
Add or remove adjusting shims. If the timing is fast, add shims. If the timing is slow, remove shims. Each 0.1 mm (0.0039 in.) changes the 


timing by 1 degree (FID). 
L40AE-L70AE  L75AE-L 1 OOAE  
Injection timing (FID bTDC) deg.  13-15  12-14  


2. 	Bleeding air from fuel system Air can enter the fuel .oil pipe system when the engine is first installed, the fuel oil pipe is removed, etc. Bleed the air according to the following instructions: 1) Place the speed control handle in the run 
position. 
2) Open all cocks of the fuel system. 
3) 	Set the decompression lever to the position 
Non-compression. 4) Make sure that fuel comes out from the fuel injection nozzle while pulling the recoil starter, it can be heard injection sound. Loosen the delivery valve holder to bleed the air easily. Retighten it to 300 -350 kg­cm (21.7 -25.3 lb-ft) with a torque wrench. 
(TD position mark) 
Checking and Servicing 

3. 	Fuel injection volume limitation 1) Adjustment before shipment. The control lever is fixed after the rated revolutions and injec­tion quatity have been checked with the 
pump installed on the special-purpose pump drive table. Then, a mark-off line is marked on the spring sheet to line up with the edge 
of the control lever. 
The access hole has an access hole pointer 
match mark. Make sure the mark-off line 
matches the edge of the control lever. 


F.0. limiter 
Make sure of the position where the governor spring is hooked. 

(Fuel injection volume limitation adjustment) 
4. 	Adjusting the clearance on intake/ exhaust valve head 
Check the clearance at the disassembly and Lock nut Adjusting screw 
reassembly, and every 500 hours of opera­tion. Then adjust it if necessary. 
Intake/exhaust valve 0.10-0.15 head clearance (0.0039 -0.0059) mm( in.) (cold state) 
1) Adjustment 
Adjust the clearance with a thickness Clearance: 0.1 o-0.15 mm (cold state) (0.0039-0.0059in .)
guage. 
(Adjusting the valve head clearance) CAUTION: 
Make sure each cylinder is in the T.D.C before adjusting the clearance. This way the intake/ exhaust rocker arms will not move even if the crankshaft is turned clockwise or counterclockwise from the TD mark. 






